Add quickstart for minimal MCP Server using .NET and publish to NuGet (#47007)
dotnet/docs: docs/ai/quickstarts/build-mcp-server.md

---

> title: Quickstart - Create a minimal MCP server using C# and publish to NuGet

Reviewer: Seems a little long for a title. How about:

```suggestion
title: Quickstart - Create a minimal MCP server and publish to NuGet
```

description: Learn to create and connect to a minimal MCP server using C# and publish it to NuGet.
ms.date: 07/02/2025
ms.topic: quickstart
ms.custom: devx-track-dotnet, devx-track-dotnet-ai
author: alexwolfmsft
ms.author: alexwolf
---

# Create a minimal MCP server using C# and publish to NuGet

In this quickstart, you create a minimal Model Context Protocol (MCP) server using the [C# SDK for MCP](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk), connect to it using GitHub Copilot, and publish it to NuGet. MCP servers are services that expose capabilities to clients through the Model Context Protocol (MCP).

> > [!NOTE]
> > This experience is currently in preview. The referenced template uses the [ModelContextProtocol](https://www.nuget.org/packages/ModelContextProtocol/) library and the [MCP registry `server.json` schema](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/registry/blob/main/docs/server-json/README.md), which are both in preview.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> The `Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Templates` experience is currently in preview. The template uses the [ModelContextProtocol](https://www.nuget.org/packages/ModelContextProtocol/) library and the [MCP registry `server.json` schema](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/registry/blob/main/docs/server-json/README.md), which are both in preview.
```

## Test the MCP server

1. Open GitHub Copilot in Visual Studio Code and switch to chat mode.

> 1. Select the **Select tools** icon to verify your **SampleMcpServer** is available with the sample tool listed.

Reviewer: Is the get random number tool installed with the template?

    :::image type="content" source="../media/mcp/available-tools-nuget.png" alt-text="A screenshot showing the available MCP tools.":::

1. Enter a prompt to run the **get_random_number** tool:

    ```console
    Give me a random number between 1 and 100.
    ```

1. GitHub Copilot requests permission to run the **get_random_number** tool for your prompt. Select **Continue** or use the arrow to select a more specific behavior:

    - **Current session** always runs the operation in the current GitHub Copilot Agent Mode session.
    - **Current workspace** always runs the command for the current Visual Studio Code workspace.
    - **Always allow** sets the operation to always run for any GitHub Copilot Agent Mode session or any Visual Studio Code workspace.

1. Verify that the server responds with a random number:

    ```output
    Your random number is 42.
    ```

> ## Adding inputs and configuration options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add inputs and configuration options
```

> In this example, enhance the MCP server to use a configuration value set in an environment variable. This could be configuration needed for the functioning of your MCP server such as an API key, an endpoint to connect to, or a local directory path depending on your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, you enhance the MCP server to use a configuration value set in an environment variable. This could be configuration needed for the functioning of your MCP server, such as an API key, an endpoint to connect to, or a local directory path.
```

1. Update the tool code to use an environment variable. Add another tool method after the `GetRandomNumber` method in `Tools/RandomNumberTools.cs`:

>    ```csharp

Reviewer: Can you put the code in a separate file and reference it like this? https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/75198f1e19a9ac3216cef2d4a65a2cb59e39e5e6/docs/ai/quickstarts/build-mcp-server.md?plain=1#L49

       }

       var weatherChoices = weather.Split(",");
       var selectedWeatherIndex =  Random.Shared.Next(0, weatherChoices.Length);

       return $"The weather in {city} is {weatherChoices[selectedWeatherIndex]}.";
    }
   ```

1. Update the `.vscode/mcp.json` to set the `WEATHER_CHOICES` environment variable for testing.

   ```json
   {
      "servers": {
        "MinimalMcpServer": {
          "type": "stdio",
          "command": "dotnet",
          "args": [
            "run",
            "--project",
            "<RELATIVE PATH TO PROJECT DIRECTORY>"
          ],
          "env": {
             "WEATHER_CHOICES": "sunny,humid,freezing"
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```

1. Try another prompt with Copilot in VS Code, such as:

    ```console
    What is the weather in Redmond, Washington?
    ```

    VS Code should return a random weather description.

1. Update the `.mcp/server.json` to declare your environment variable input. The `server.json` file schema is defined by the [MCP Registry project](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/registry/blob/main/docs/server-json/README.md) and is used by NuGet.org to generate VS Code MCP configuration.

>    Use the `environment_variables` property to declare environment variables used by your app that will be set by the client using the MCP server (for example, VS Code).
> 
>    You can use `package_arguments` to define CLI arguments that will be passed to your app. For more examples, see the [MCP Registry project](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/registry/blob/main/docs/server-json/examples.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use the `environment_variables` property to declare environment variables used by your app that will be set by the client using the MCP server (for example, VS Code).
* Use the `package_arguments` property to define CLI arguments that will be passed to your app. For more examples, see the [MCP Registry project](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/registry/blob/main/docs/server-json/examples.md).
```

>    You can use `package_arguments` to define CLI arguments that will be passed to your app. See the MCP Registry project for [more examples](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/registry/blob/main/docs/server-json/examples.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can use `package_arguments` to define CLI arguments that will be passed to your app. For more examples, see the [MCP Registry project](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/registry/blob/main/docs/server-json/examples.md).
```

You can [test your MCP server again](#test-the-mcp-server) before moving forward.

## Pack and publish to NuGet

1. Pack the project:

    ```bash
    dotnet pack -c Release
    ```

1. Publish the package to NuGet:

    ```bash
    dotnet nuget push bin/Release/*.nupkg --api-key <your-api-key> --source https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json
    ```

    If you want to test the publishing flow before publishing to NuGet.org, you can register an account on the NuGet Gallery integration environment: [https://int.nugettest.org](https://int.nugettest.org). The `push` command would be modified to:

    ```bash
    dotnet nuget push bin/Release/*.nupkg --api-key <your-api-key> --source https://apiint.nuget.org/v3/index.json
    ```

For more information, see [Publish a package](/nuget/nuget-org/publish-a-package).

## Discover MCP servers on NuGet.org

1. Search for your MCP server package on [NuGet.org](https://www.nuget.org/packages?packagetype=mcpserver) (or [int.nugettest.org](https://int.nugettest.org/packages?packagetype=mcpserver) if you published to the integration environment) and select it from the list.

1. View the package details and copy the JSON from the "MCP Server" tab.

> 1. In your `mcp.json` file in the `.vscode` folder, add the copied JSON, which will look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In your `mcp.json` file in the `.vscode` folder, add the copied JSON, which looks like this:
```

   ```json
   {
     "inputs": [
       {
         "type": "promptString",
         "id": "weather-choices",
         "description": "Comma separated list of weather descriptions to randomly select.",
         "password": false
       }
     ],
     "servers": {
       "Contoso.SampleMcpServer": {
         "type": "stdio",
         "command": "dnx",
         "args": [
           "Contoso.SampleMcpServer",
           "--version",
           "0.0.1-beta",
           "--yes"
         ],
         "env": {
           "WEATHER_CHOICES": "${input:weather-choices}"
         }
       }
     }
   }
   ```

>    If you published to the NuGet Gallery integration environment, you need to add `"--add-source", "https://apiint.nuget.org/v3/index.json"` at the end of the `"args"` array above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you published to the NuGet Gallery integration environment, you need to add `"--add-source", "https://apiint.nuget.org/v3/index.json"` at the end of the `"args"` array.
```

1. Save the file.

1. In GitHub Copilot, select the **Select tools** icon to verify your **SampleMcpServer** is available with the tools listed.

1. Enter a prompt to run the new **get_city_weather** tool:

    ```console
    What is the weather in Redmond?
    ```

1. If you added inputs to your MCP server (for example, `WEATHER_CHOICES`), you will be prompted to provide values.

1. Verify that the server responds with the random weather:

    ```output
    The weather in Redmond is balmy.
    ```

## Common issues

### The command "dnx" needed to run SampleMcpServer was not found.

If VS Code shows this error when starting the MCP server, you need to install a compatible version of the .NET SDK.

:::image type="content" source="../media/mcp/missing-dnx.png" alt-text="A screenshot showing the missing dnx command in VS Code.":::

The `dnx` command is shipped as part of the .NET SDK, starting with version 10 preview 6. [Install the .NET 10 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) to resolve this issue.

## Related content

- [Get started with .NET AI and the Model Context Protocol](../get-started-mcp.md)

> - [Model Context Protocol .NET Samples](https://github.com/microsoft/mcp-dotnet-samples)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Model Context Protocol .NET samples](https://github.com/microsoft/mcp-dotnet-samples)
```
